Treasures: 14 / 20
Architectural Features: 18 / 20
Cafe: 12 / 20
Dead People: 1 / 20
Stories & Trivia: 12 / 20

Total Score..... 57 / 100


29 May 2011

Lincoln was a small, comfortable cafe, a feast of architecture, holdiing treasure and stories... but was light on dead people.

An architectural treat, to which we should thank Bishop Hugh, who was quite a popular chap back in the late 1100's. By far the most important figure-head Lincoln Cathedral has seen and he will be disappointed to be automatically disqualified from the Dead Person category simply because of his career choice. His zeal for the beauty of 'the house of God' led to decades of, in cathedral terms, outrageous and sumptuous architecture.

Built on a hill to be closer to the clouds, with 1000 years of history, this building stands out amongst Cathedrals.

Must-Dos: Roof tour, Magna Carta, Imp


Architectural Features

Crazy Zig-Zag Vaults
The space above St Hugh's choir zigzags it's length. It was completely asymmetrical (not common!) and the walls are littered with seemingly random decorativeness. made more symmetrical later with the first use in a Cathedral of arched diagonal ribs, called tiercerons. All the church's vaults are original and experimental. Make sure you look up when you visit.


Once the tallest building in the world!
The pyramids of Giza held the title of tallest structures in the world for 4000 years. Lincoln Cathedral took this honour and held it tight for almost 200 years, until it's giant spire blew over in 1548. Regardless, this is all quite cool.

John Ruskin Quote (wiki)
John Ruskin (8 February 1819 – 20 January 1900) was the leading English art critic of the Victorian era; "I have always held and am prepared against all evidence to maintain that the Cathedral of Lincoln is out and out the most precious piece of architecture in the British Isles and roughly speaking worth any two other cathedrals we have." John Ruskin, 1819-1900.


The Roof
It's basically just a lid. There is a roof tour which we recommend and you can explore the rafters and trusses. This is a giant structure that stays in place purely because of it's humongous size and weight.


The Western Towers
When you see these 2 towers dominating the skyline, like a fortress, you can't fail to be impressed. With these, Lincoln stands out amongst all England's churches.


St Hugh's Choir
Post apocolyptic earthquake of 1185 a large and splendid and intricatly carvred choir was built.

The Angel Choir
So popular was the tomb of St Hugh the whole east wing, deep inside the Cathedral, was rebuilt in his honour, and the Angel Choir was born.


Rose Windows
The Dean's Eye and The Bishop's Eye - two large rose windows with highly unusual medieval features.



Stories & Trivia

The Lincoln Imp
Actual Devils that got up to a lot of mischief in the church! This story must be one of the most important in Lincoln's illustrious history as it is now the symbol of the city! One such devil was caught tripping up the Bishop so an angel set this one in stone, which you can see to this day. Another must have done far worse as this one was sent to Grimsby.

Hugh of Lincoln
We don't normally mention any religous figure heads in our write-ups. This man however played such an important role in the history of the church he should be noted.

Giant Earthquake
God not so clever after all
In 1185 an earthquake shook this building to the ground. Luckily the next Bishop was to be St Hugh, and he had great fun rebuilding.

Giant Fire
Really, don't do this sort of thing on your doorstep. Giant fire, 1141.


Cafe
Cloisters
The Red Lion of the cafe circuit, at Lincoln Cathedral you'll drink at The Cloisters - 
small, tidy, calm and well presented. Solid wood furniture. Nice colour scheme. The tea was good.

However, cakes were served in plastic wrapping. Okay, it's a small cafe and budgets are tight, but these are the details that make a cafe.


Treasures
Magna Carta (wiki)
There are not many of these left. This is a bit special.
Okay, admittedly now held in the castle, but we're back to St. Hugh again. This guy is a very important part of our history. He added his signature to this little document. This document has roots in Lincoln.

The Wren Library
A rare collection of manuscripts...
Hmmmm. You're unlikely to get to read the aged texts resting here. The 'Wren' is who you first think of, Sir Christopher. Hence the mention here.

Rose Windows
The coloured windows in this church may startle you, and the jewels are the circular ones
A highly uncommon feature among medieval architecture in England. The "Dean’s Eye" and the "Bishop’s Eye are big colourful round windows.  The all-round brightness and quality of the windows in this church stand out and are an important feature.
