Spring came late, but made a grand entrance. The April sun shone full beam and Norwich’s inhabitants filled the city’s pretty streets - even the bearded volunteers at a Socialist Worker stall in the market square seemed relaxed and cheerful. Shrub, Sneak and The Spesh had also blinked disbelievingly at the weather. Our heroes had a generous lunch in a delightful historic pub called The Dove {? Is that right?}, before moving on to the expansive and attractive cathedral precincts.
 
Norwich’s cathedral is a mainly Norman structure, knocked up with limestone imported from Northern France. Its handsome design has a simplicity and solidity that contrasts with the elaborate Gothic wedding cakes found elsewhere; the decorative forms on the tower - abstract circles and squares - look almost modernist in their restraint.
 
Of many points of note inside, Shrub was impressed by stone columns baked pink by the fires that periodically gutted the building, while The Spesh liked the civil war relics such as the musket ball lodged in a tomb; an enraged puritan had shot carved bosses of the Virgin Mary in the ceiling, and, as an enthusiastic guide explained the tale, The Spesh could almost hear the sound of the ricocheting projectile echoing round the nave.
 
The cloisters, dating from when there was an abbey on-site and hosting a slightly-too-easy labyrinth, are undoubtedly a good spot for lounging about on the grass on a bright afternoon. Adjacent to this, an excellent wooden structure, less than ten years old, houses a new refectory. Our adventurers arrived close to closing time - a deal on the remaining cakes, plump and very tasty, meant they ate with both great enjoyment and economy. The cheerful staff and shimmering trees brushing against the windows completed the scene: the best café of the tour so far? It might well be.
 
On the way back to the station, an errant guest from a nearby wedding reception pointed out falcons nesting in the cathedral’s spire. They really are a cheerful lot in Norwich. Even the Canaries fans that filled the station after beating Reading seemed chilled and good natured, although match-day trouble was probably unlikely at this most middle-class of Premiership fixtures: the teams’ two sponsors - Aviva and Waitrose - say it all.