** Exeter **

Exeter Architectural Features: 14 / 20
Stories & Trivia: 5 / 20
Treasures: 14 / 20
Dead People: 4 / 20
Cafe: 17 / 20
Total Score..... 54 / 100 

12 May 2012
Exeter cathedral has the cafe that other churches dream of! Some surprising treasures, stunning features, some bodies of note and a few stories to tell.
This was a day out that took all the Cathedral Cafe adventurers a little by surprise. Apprehensive of the 8am train from London and the 3 hour ride west, being greeted by glorious sunshine and a truly magnificent church on a delightful village green immediately banished the journey to the back of our minds.

Stand-out feature: The Cafe! With it's vaulted roof, stained glass windows, immaculate garden, great food, great tea and great service. But don't spend your entire visit drinking their tea. On a nice day ensure you leave time to soak up the atmosphere and the hustle and bustle all around the church.
Must-Dos: Appreciate the twin towers, Hickery Dickery Dock, sledging flag.

Architectural Features

Record Breaking roof
Longest uninterrupted vaulted ceiling in the whole world

Dominating east and west towers
This is the ONLY cathedral with two squres towers, one on each wall,giving it a UNIQUE footprint amongst our bishop's seats.


Stories & Trivia

Viking Raids
The church was moved from its original site to counter the danger of maurauding Norsemen

Hickery Dickery Dock Nursery Rhyme

Hickery Dickery Dock, the clock has a cat flap...
Some speculate the nursury rhyme was inspired by Exeter's impressive clock, which was regularly put out of action by hungry mice munching through the ropework until a cat was let loose in the workings.

Nazi Bombing
Nazi bombing in 1942...with a direct hit. One of the replacement windows vividly depicta the night of the raid.


Cafe

Beer
This cafe served Doom Bar straight from the barrel!!
Just to be clear, while on duty neither Shrub, Sneak nor Spesh drank the Doom Bar (the long pre-visit lunch and scoring debates post-visit are exempt from such red tape and regulation).

Tea
Tea quality VERY VERY high
Great colour, great flavour, ample quantity. Tea pots and saucers. Also extra hot water to top ourselves up.

Menu
Plenty of cakes, cream teas and a few more substantial offerings. Home made.
The Devon crea-teas were delicious, with generous servings of clotted cream. Delicious.

Service
Friendly, helpful, efficient, happy service.

Garden
The clositers provide a relaxing and quiet spot to enjoy your refreshment


Treasures

Bishop's Seat
Gigantic, bomb-dodging, bishop's carved seat: the largest piece of wooden furniture in Britain.

30 Misericords
Medieval wooden flip-down seats, a bit like you get on the tube, although with ornate wooden carving Following a little refit some time ago (and possibly some 'medieval' measuring) not all the seats from the choir would fit back in. So the 30th misericord is specially carved and put on display and provides a great little anecdote for any serious tour guide.

Bosses
The carved stone 'bosses' that hold together the ribs forming the ceiling were eye-catching and good fun.

The Staff!
Everyone we met was cheerful and accomodating.

Astronomical Clock
A little hard to read. And quite bulky.
An astronomical clock, with its original mechanical workings still on display, was once a crucial help to sailors judging the tides on the estuary and Devon coast.

Impressive organ.
Giant pipes. Massive bass. 17th century dubstep?

Captain Scott's Sledging Flag
From his ill-fated venture to the Antarctic. Disappointingly on loan elsewhere during Shrub, Sneak and The Spesh's visit, it being the centenary of Scott's death.




Dead People

Concentration Camp Pioneer

Buried in the cathedral is the British General who imaginatively canme up with the idea of a concentration camp
Unfortuntately not one of our intrepid Cathedral Cafe team can recall this guy's name. But yet another great Bristish invention.
 
General John Simcoe

He founded Toronto (although he called it York)

