** Chichester **

Chichester, "the most typical English Cathedral", was a well equipped cafe, has it's own treasury and accommodates one of our most famous composers.


On the river Lavant, just beneath the South Downs (and conveniently opposite a House of Frasier) we have an 11th century church where a bishop sits rather comfortably. In this Sussex city with it's Roman and Anglo-Saxon and Norman footnotes, we have a tidy little cathedral.

Structural embarrassments and natural disasters feature richly in The Cathedral Church of the Holy Trinity history. It's a small cathedral that stands out amongst all others in our CofE; the bell tower of this cathedral is separated  completely from the church itself!

Further more Philip Arthur Larkin was inspired to write a poem about a tomb here. Some of Holst is here. It has a striking green copper roof! There is only one other medieval cathedral visible from the sea. There are numerous treasures (most notable to us the Roman mosaic) and the cafe is most competent with excellent staff and a fantastic little garden. Plus this is a live music venue that also hosts exhibitions. And at the base of the spire nest Peregrine Falcons. Small church maybe, but continues to be important.





Architecture. 11/20

Both Norman and Gothic styles
Founded in 1075, it received attention from the Normans and a couple of hundred years later some Gothic enhancements.

Only free standing bell tower
Subsidence explains the positioning of the 15th century bell tower at some distance from the cathedral

Only cathedral with double aisles
Usually found in giant basilicas, Chichester is the only cathedral of ours with 'double aisles'. This is basically 2 rows of columns along the aisle to help support the building instead of one.

Green copper roof
A striking green copper roof that can be seen from miles around

Convenient bike rack
Just outside the main entrance, tucked just out of immediate view, we have a bike rack. We had 3 bikes at the time. 

Detailed stone carvings
Find the bespectacled lawyer with a spout coming out of his mouth.




Treasures 7/20

Distinctive and rare Norman sculptures
Gothic "Arundel tomb", showing the Richard FitzAlan, Earl of Arundel (1313–1376), holding hands with his second wife, Eleanor of Lancaster. And one other...

Patch of Roman mosaic
Fragment of 2nd century Roman Mosaic, re-discovered in 1966)

Militaria
The usual militaria that clutters English cathedrals (regimental flags, model frigate, bell from HMS Local Reference). 

Contemporary Art
Lots of inoffensive and forgettable contemporary art (font, tapestry, window, paintings).

The Treasury 
Features silver goblets etc. We weren't aloud in.




Dead people. 3/20

Gustav Theodore Holst
An English composer most famous for his orchestral suite The Planets.

Richard FitzAlan, 10th Earl of Arundel
The oldest Earldom in English peerage and in charge of Arundel castle, West Sussex.





Stories, Myths and Trivia. 4/20

A building history peppered by disasters
Most notably subsidence. The steeple once collapsed.

Peregrine Falcons
A family nest in the roof and feature on the tea towels sold in the little shop.

Arundel poem
"An Arundel Tomb", a poem by Philip Larkin, describes a medieval tomb which is found here.


Can see it's steeple from the sea
There is only one other medieval cathedral that seafarers can use for navigation. Any guesses?

Can donate money using credit card machines on the spot
First time we've seen this. Machines throughout to take your payment.

Excellent information for tourists 
lots of fact-filled boards and helpful staff.

Full programme of cultural events
including band of Royal Marines.




Cafe. 16/20

Clositers Cafe
Full menu. Great service. Probably relied upon by locals as well as tourists. Insides new - smart but maybe lacking character compared to say, Exeter. All round very professional.


Great garden
Spacious, neat and tidy, comfortable and relaxing.

Excellent cake
Proper home made cakes were on stand. And it was excellent.

