Rochester

Readers will recall Rochester was the first place reached by those other bemused adventurers on a perambulatory tour of England, the Corresponding Society of the Pickwick Club. Doubtless the authenticated accounts of Shrub, Sneak and The Spesh's own wanderings, recorded herewith, will, in time, be regarded with the same esteem as those of Dickens' heroes. With that in mind, let it be noted that, like the noble Pickwickians, Shrub, Sneak and The Spesh recognise the principle of every member defraying his own travelling expenses.

Fittingly, and due to complete accident, our plucky trio arrived in the historic Medway town in the midst of a Dickensian Festival. Held every Christmas, this spectacle features locals in period costume, tasty mulled wine sold in aid of veterans of the Afghan campaigns, roast chestnuts, and crowds so big as to require marshals with megaphones and high visibility jackets. It was a lot of fun.

It took some time for our adventurers to make their way down the High Street; Sneak and Shrub became mesmerised by a shop selling cutlasses and muskets, while The Spesh was waylaid in a bakers with a cream horn clear-out. But they finally made their way to the town's handsome church and its charming frontage.

As Britain's second oldest cathedral, Rochester far predates the gargantuan Gothic showboats that dominate the British cathedral scene, possessing instead a compact and intimate feel to which Shrub, Sneak and The Spesh quickly warmed. Its homely Norman architecture packs a lot in; this is emphasised by the strict one-way system enforced by Cathedral staff, following a circuitous route that allows the visitor to tick-off the many treasures and points of note they pass. Particularly poignant were the Royal Engineers' shrapnel-scarred standards, and a new fresco in the Byzantine-style which colourfully celebrated the building's 700th anniversary.

Eventually, our selfless trio reached the cafeteria, which was packed, it being Festival day. Cakes were home-made and enjoyable, but Sneak had doubts about the tea. All tables were taken, but there were seats in the gardens; a bit chilly, it being December, but not unbearable. Like all the Cathedral's grounds, the gardens were very well kept, and will present a delightful scene come the spring. Our travellers later dropped-by the temporary café in the crypt set up to cater for the crowds; after the queues of the official refectory, it actually offered a much more pleasant experience: drinks were even served by a vicar.

Shrub, Sneak and The Spesh ended their day in a boisterous boozer by Rochester Castle, where The Spesh explained the chief differences between Men of Kent (those rumbustious fellows born east of the Medway) and Kentish Men (their effete westerly cousins). Or is it the other way round, with the Men of Kent in the west? The Spesh could not really remember; yet more evidence that his supposed learning can only be considered such in the Pickwickian sense of the term.